.Dd March 2, 2026
.Dt MINIWEB 1
.Os OpenBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm miniweb
.Nd OpenBSD-native C99 HTTP server
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hv
.Op Fl b Ar address
.Op Fl c Ar connections
.Op Fl f Ar file
.Op Fl l Ar logfile
.Op Fl p Ar port
.Op Fl t Ar threads
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a lightweight HTTP server written in C99 for OpenBSD.
It exposes a system dashboard and JSON APIs for metrics, networking
diagnostics, manual page browsing, and package management.
.Pp
The runtime uses a single
.Xr kqueue 2
dispatcher thread and a configurable worker-thread pool.
Three independent caching layers improve performance:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Template-backed HTML views are served from an in-memory template cache
(refreshed every 60 seconds).
.It
Static assets are served from a sharded file cache with admission policy.
.It
Manual pages use a two-level cache (L1: RAM, L2: filesystem).
.El
.Pp
A generic heartbeat scheduler fires periodic background tasks for metrics
collection and cache maintenance.
.Pp
.Nm
does not implement TLS directly.
Run it behind
.Xr relayd 8
for TLS termination.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl b Ar address
Bind to an IPv4 address.
Default is
.Cm 127.0.0.1 .
.It Fl c Ar connections
Maximum concurrent connections.
Clamped to the compile-time limit of
.Cm 4096 .
Default is
.Cm 1280 .
.It Fl f Ar file
Load configuration from
.Ar file .
A parse error in an explicitly supplied file is fatal.
.It Fl h
Print usage and exit.
.It Fl l Ar logfile
Append log output to
.Ar logfile
instead of stderr.
.It Fl p Ar port
TCP listen port.
Default is
.Cm 9001 .
.It Fl t Ar threads
Worker thread count.
Clamped to the range 1\(en32.
Default is
.Cm 4 .
.It Fl v
Enable verbose logging.
Equivalent to setting
.Cm verbose yes
in the configuration file.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION FILE
On startup
.Nm
searches for a configuration file in the following order (first file found
wins):
.Pp
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Explicit path from the
.Fl f
flag.
.It
.Pa ./miniweb.conf
.It
.Pa $HOME/.miniweb.conf
.It
.Pa /etc/miniweb.conf
.El
.Pp
If no file is found, compiled-in defaults are used and startup continues
normally.
CLI flags always override file values.
.Pp
The file format is one directive per line:
.Pp
.Dl key value
.Pp
Keys are case-insensitive.
Lines beginning with
.Ql #
and blank lines are ignored.
.Pp
Supported keys:
.Bl -tag -width "mandoc_timeout"
.It Cm port
TCP listen port.
Default:
.Cm 9001 .
.It Cm bind , bind_addr
IPv4 address to bind to.
Default:
.Cm 127.0.0.1 .
Use
.Cm 0.0.0.0
to listen on all interfaces.
.It Cm threads
Worker thread count.
Clamped to 1\(en32.
Default:
.Cm 4 .
.It Cm max_conns
Maximum concurrent connections.
Default:
.Cm 1280 .
.It Cm conn_timeout
Idle connection timeout in seconds.
Default:
.Cm 30 .
.It Cm max_req_size
Maximum HTTP request size in bytes.
Must not exceed the compile-time limit of
.Cm 16384 .
Default:
.Cm 16384 .
.It Cm mandoc_timeout
Timeout for
.Xr mandoc 1
subprocess invocations, in seconds.
Default:
.Cm 10 .
.It Cm static_dir
Path to the static assets directory.
Default:
.Pa static .
.It Cm templates_dir
Path to the HTML templates directory.
Default:
.Pa templates .
.It Cm autoindex
Enable index-file fallback when a static directory is requested.
When enabled, requests such as
.Cm GET /static/doxygen/html/
automatically serve
.Pa index.html
or
.Pa index.htm
if present.
Default:
.Cm no .
.It Cm mandoc_path
Path to the
.Xr mandoc 1
binary.
Default:
.Pa /usr/bin/mandoc .
.It Cm trusted_proxy
IPv4 address of a reverse proxy whose
.Dv X-Forwarded-For ,
.Dv X-Forwarded-Proto ,
and
.Dv X-Real-IP
headers are honoured.
Default:
.Cm 127.0.0.1 .
.It Cm verbose
Enable verbose logging.
Accepted values:
.Cm yes , no , true , false , 1 , 0 .
Default:
.Cm no .
.It Cm log_file
Log file path.
Empty or absent means stderr.
.It Cm enable_views
Enable or disable view/static route registration.
Accepted values:
.Cm yes , no , true , false , 1 , 0 .
Default:
.Cm yes .
.It Cm enable_metrics
Enable or disable metrics view/API routes.
Default:
.Cm yes .
.It Cm enable_networking
Enable or disable networking view/API routes.
Default:
.Cm yes .
.It Cm enable_man
Enable or disable manual page routes.
Default:
.Cm yes .
.It Cm enable_packages
Enable or disable package manager view/API routes.
Default:
.Cm yes .
.El


.Sh ROUTE ENABLE/DISABLE
At bootstrap, route groups are attached by module.
Each module can be enabled/disabled from the configuration file using
.Cm enable_views ,
.Cm enable_metrics ,
.Cm enable_networking ,
.Cm enable_man , and
.Cm enable_packages .
.Pp
When a module is disabled, its related routes are not registered and will
return 404/405 according to router matching rules.
This allows deploying the same binary with reduced surface area by profile.

.Sh ADD/REMOVE VIEWS
Template-backed pages are declared in the static
.Vt view_routes[]
registry in
.Pa src/router/url_registry_init.c .
To add a view, append a new entry mapping method/path/title/template files.
To remove a view, delete that entry.
.Pp
At runtime, all view routes can be disabled together via
.Cm enable_views no
without editing code.

.Sh LAYOUT
The project keeps a layered layout:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Pa src/router
for route declarations, registration and matching.
.It
.Pa src/modules/*
for domain modules (metrics, networking, man, packages).
.It
.Pa templates
for HTML views and page-specific head/js fragments.
.It
.Pa src/storage
for DB facades and schema/statement helpers.
.El

.Sh CACHING
.Nm
maintains three independent in-process caches.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "Man render cache"
.It Template cache
All files in
.Cm templates_dir
are preloaded at startup and refreshed every 60 seconds.
A mutex-protected directory scan replaces the full cache on each refresh.
.It Static file cache
Sharded LRU with 16 shards, 32 slots per shard, a 256 KiB per-file
limit, a 120-second TTL, and an admission policy requiring 2 hits before
a file is promoted.
Insert rate is capped at 8 entries per shard per second.
.It Man render cache
Two-level.
.Em L1
is an in-process sharded cache: 8 shards, 64 slots per shard, 600-second TTL.
Entries are malloc'd copies of the rendered body.
.Em L2
is a filesystem cache under
.Pa static/man/{area}/{section}/{page}.{format}
with a 300-second TTL.
On a full miss, mandoc is invoked as a subprocess.
Cache invalidation requires a server restart or TTL expiry.
.El


.Sh MODULE LAYOUT STATUS
Current module layout in
.Pa src/modules
reflects the ongoing refactor plan:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Manual pages: facade + split internals
.Pq Pa man_module.c , Pa man_service.c , Pa man_json.c , Pa man_query.c , Pa man_index.c , Pa man_render.c .
.It
Metrics: orchestrator + collectors + snapshots + process/json units
.Pq Pa metrics_module.c , Pa metrics_collectors.c , Pa metrics_snapshot.c , Pa metrics_process.c , Pa metrics_json.c .
.It
Networking and packages still keep larger orchestrator units and are next extraction targets.
.El
.Pp
For the manual pages stack,
.Pa man_module.c
is now route wiring and cleanup delegation only;
query validation/parsing lives in
.Pa man_query.c ,
index/search preparation lives in
.Pa man_index.c ,
and HTTP payload shaping/render caching lives in
.Pa man_render.c .
.Pa man_service.c
remains the service-facing facade.

.Sh RELIABILITY NOTES
Recent hardening updates include:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Worker request dispatch now executes each matched handler exactly once per
request.
.It
Idle-connection sweeping uses synchronized pool inspection to avoid dispatcher
vs worker races under high load.
.It
HTTP response header assembly clamps/truncates safely and rejects overlong
header blocks instead of performing unsafe pointer arithmetic.
.It
Server startup now uses unified cleanup paths so listen/kqueue descriptors are
closed on all initialization failures.
.It
Forwarded client-IP and HTTPS proxy headers are only trusted when the socket
peer IP matches
.Cm trusted_proxy .
.It
Shutdown performs explicit cleanup of process-global HTTP/man caches and man
module semaphore resources.
.El

.Sh PERFORMANCE
For best throughput and tail latency, tune worker and cache settings together.
.Pp
Recommended tuning order:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Increase
.Cm threads
incrementally while observing latency and CPU saturation.
.It
Set
.Cm max_conns
below host descriptor/memory limits to avoid overload collapse.
.It
Prefer cache-friendly assets and templates:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Template cache and hot-view cache reduce repeated render costs.
.It
Sharded static file cache reduces disk I/O for hot assets.
.It
Metrics/networking periodic snapshots avoid expensive rebuild on every request.
.It
Packages and man endpoints use query/result caches to reduce subprocess load.
.El
.It
Move periodic collectors into heartbeat tasks with explicit periods.
.It
When SQLite backend is enabled, reuse prepared statements and group writes in
transactions to reduce fsync overhead.
.El
.Pp
Current SQLite facade functions are:
.Fn mw_db_open ,
.Fn mw_db_exec_schema ,
.Fn mw_stmt_prepare ,
.Fn mw_stmt_step ,
and transaction helpers
.Fn mw_tx_begin /
.Fn mw_tx_commit /
.Fn mw_tx_rollback .
These APIs are designed for migration of feature flags, warm caches, and
historical snapshots.

.Sh RUNTIME ARCHITECTURE
.Nm
uses a two-tier threading model.
.Pp
The
.Em dispatcher thread
(main) owns the
.Xr kqueue 2
file descriptor, runs the accept loop, and enqueues ready connections into a
ring-buffer work queue.
It never calls a route handler.
.Pp
The
.Em worker pool
(N threads, configurable via
.Fl t )
dequeues connections, reads the full HTTP request, parses the request line
and headers, dispatches the matching route handler, and either closes the
socket or re-arms it for keep-alive.
.Pp
Compile-time hard limits:
.Bl -tag -width "REQUEST_BUFFER_SIZE"
.It Dv MAX_EVENTS
256 \(em
.Xr kevent 2
batch size per iteration.
.It Dv MAX_CONNECTIONS
4096 \(em connection pool size.
.It Dv THREAD_POOL_SIZE
32 \(em maximum worker threads.
.It Dv REQUEST_BUFFER_SIZE
16384 \(em per-connection receive buffer.
.It Dv LISTEN_BACKLOG
1024 \(em
.Xr listen 2
backlog.
.It Dv QUEUE_CAPACITY
4096 \(em work queue ring-buffer capacity.
.It Dv MAX_KEEPALIVE_REQUESTS
64 \(em requests per keep-alive connection.
.El
.Sh KQUEUE DISPATCHER
The listening socket is registered with
.Dv EVFILT_READ | EV_CLEAR
so that the backlog counter resets after every
.Xr kevent 2
return.
.Pp
Client sockets are registered with
.Dv EV_ADD | EV_DISPATCH .
.Dv EV_DISPATCH
automatically disables the event after the first delivery, eliminating the
race where multiple workers could receive the same file descriptor.
.Pp
Each main-loop iteration uses a 1-second timeout so that idle connection
sweeping runs at least once per second regardless of traffic.
The sweep closes connections whose
.Dv last_activity
timestamp is older than
.Cm conn_timeout .
.Pp
The
.Dv udata
pointer in each
.Xr kevent 2
structure is validated against a per-file-descriptor generation counter before
dispatching.
Stale pointers from recycled descriptors are silently ignored.
.Sh WORKER POOL AND WORK QUEUE
Workers are identical POSIX threads sharing a single ring-buffer work queue
protected by a mutex and a condition variable.
.Pp
The dispatcher enqueues connections non-blocking; if the queue is full the
connection is dropped with a
.Cm 503
response.
Workers block on
.Fn pthread_cond_wait
until a connection is available or the server shuts down.
.Pp
Within a worker, the read loop accumulates data from the non-blocking socket
until the HTTP header terminator
.Pq Dv \er\en\er\en
is found.
If
.Dv EAGAIN
is returned before headers are complete, the
.Xr kqueue 2
event is re-enabled with
.Dv EV_ENABLE
and the worker returns without closing the connection.
.Pp
Keep-alive connections are re-armed after each request.
A connection is closed unconditionally after
.Dv MAX_KEEPALIVE_REQUESTS
(64) requests on the same socket.
.Sh CONNECTION POOL
The connection pool is a flat array of
.Vt connection_t
structs indexed by file descriptor.
Allocation and deallocation are O(1) via a LIFO free-stack.
Each slot carries the client socket, peer address, receive buffer,
activity timestamps, request count, and a generation counter.
The generation counter allows the dispatcher to detect stale
.Xr kevent 2
.Dv udata
pointers: if the counter in the event does not match the current counter for
that file descriptor, the event is a stale reference to a recycled socket and
is ignored.
.Sh HTTP LAYER
.Ss Response pool
.Fn http_response_create
allocates a response object from a per-thread shard of a static response pool
(16 shards, 1024 slots each) to avoid a
.Xr malloc 3
call on every request.
If the pool is exhausted it falls back to
.Xr calloc 3 .
.Ss Serialisation
.Fn http_response_send
serialises the status line, standard headers
.Pq Content-Type , Content-Length , Connection , Server ,
optional custom headers, and the body using a single
.Xr writev 2
call when a body is present, or
.Xr write 2
for header-only responses.
Write retries handle
.Dv EAGAIN / EWOULDBLOCK
on non-blocking sockets with a limited retry count (5 attempts, 100 ms
polling) to prevent CPU spinning on full send buffers.
.Ss Subprocess execution
.Fn safe_popen_read_argv
forks, redirects stdout to a pipe, redirects stderr to
.Pa /dev/null ,
and reads up to
.Ar max_size
bytes with a wall-clock timeout enforced by
.Xr poll 2 .
On timeout the child is sent
.Dv SIGKILL
before
.Xr waitpid 2 .
A semaphore limits concurrent mandoc subprocesses to
.Em min(threads * 2, 16)
to prevent file descriptor exhaustion under heavy load.
.Sh ROUTING
Routes are stored in a flat array (up to
.Dv MAX_ROUTES
= 32 entries) registered at startup by
.Fn init_routes
in
.Pa src/router/url_registry_init.c .
.Pp
.Fn route_match
resolves a handler in two passes:
.Bl -enum
.It
Exact match: linear scan comparing method and path strings.
.It
Dynamic prefix match (GET only):
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}[.fmt]
\(em matched when the path begins with
.Pa /man/
and contains at least two additional slashes.
.It
.Pa /api/man/...
\(em prefix match.
.It
.Pa /api/packages/...
\(em prefix match.
.It
.Pa /static/...
\(em prefix match.
.El
.El
.Pp
When a path is known but the method is wrong, a
.Cm 405 Method Not Allowed
response is sent with an
.Dv Allow
header.
Unknown paths receive
.Cm 404 Not Found .
.Sh ADDING AND REMOVING ROUTES, MODULES, AND WEB VIEWS
.Ss Adding an API endpoint
Implement an
.Fn attach_routes
callback in the new module and register routes via the router facade:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int my_module_attach_routes(struct router *r)
{
    return router_register(r, "GET", "/api/myfeature",
        my_feature_handler);
}
.Ed
.Pp
Add the module descriptor to the
.Vt miniweb_module
array in
.Fn init_routes
inside
.Pa src/router/url_registry_init.c
with
.Va enabled_by_default
set to 1.
The handler must have the signature
.Ft int Fn handler "http_request_t *req"
and call one of the HTTP send helpers before returning.
Raise
.Dv MAX_ROUTES
in
.Pa include/miniweb/router/urls.h
if more than 32 routes are needed.
.Ss Adding a web view
.Bl -enum
.It
Add an entry to the
.Vt view_routes[]
table in
.Pa src/router/url_registry.c :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"GET", "/mypage", "MiniWeb - My Page",
 "mypage.html",
 "mypage_extra_head.html",
 "mypage_extra_js.html"},
.Ed
.It
Create
.Pa templates/mypage.html
with the page body content.
The base layout
.Pa templates/base.html
is injected automatically.
The optional fragment files are silently skipped if absent.
.It
The URL is automatically registered by
.Fn views_module_attach_routes
at startup.
Add the path to
.Va g_hot_view_cache
in
.Pa src/router/route_table.c
if the rendered HTML should be cached.
.El
.Ss Removing a route or view
Remove the
.Fn register_route
call or delete the entry from
.Va view_routes[] .
Requests to that path will receive
.Cm 404 .
.Ss Module attach API
.Fn miniweb_module_attach_enabled
in
.Pa src/router/module_attach.c
iterates a
.Vt miniweb_module
array and calls each enabled module's
.Fn init
and
.Fn attach_routes
callbacks.
All built-in modules
.Pq metrics, networking, man, packages, and views
are registered through this contract at startup.
.Sh TEMPLATE ENGINE AND VIEW CACHE
.Ss Template engine
All HTML files in
.Cm templates_dir
are preloaded into a heap-allocated in-memory cache at startup by
.Fn template_cache_init .
The cache is refreshed lazily every 60 seconds.
.Pp
.Fn template_render_with_data
assembles a page by loading
.Pa base.html ,
the page-specific content file, and optional
.Pa extra_head
and
.Pa extra_js
fragments, then substituting the placeholders
.Ql {{title}} ,
.Ql {{page_content}} ,
.Ql {{extra_head}} ,
and
.Ql {{extra_js}} .
.Ss Hot view cache
.Fn view_template_handler
maintains a small cache of pre-rendered HTML for the five top-level pages
.Pq Pa / , /docs , /networking , /packages , /apiroot .
Entries are valid for 10 seconds.
On a cache hit the rendered HTML is duplicated and returned without touching
the template engine.
.Sh STATIC FILE CACHE
Static assets are served from a sharded in-memory cache:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
16 independent shards, each protecting 32 slots, keyed by file path.
.It
Files larger than 256 KiB are never cached and are always streamed.
.It
A two-stage admission policy requires at least two requests before a file
is admitted to the cache.
.It
Each shard limits insertions to 8 per second using a token bucket.
.It
Entries older than 120 seconds are evicted on the next shard access.
.It
Cache hits are validated against
.Dv st_mtime .
.El
.Sh HEARTBEAT SCHEDULER
.Pa src/core/heartbeat.c
provides a generic periodic task scheduler using
.Dv CLOCK_MONOTONIC
to avoid clock skew issues from NTP adjustments.
Up to 32 named tasks can be registered with
.Fn heartbeat_register .
Each task specifies a callback, an opaque context pointer, a period in
seconds, and an initial delay.
.Fn heartbeat_register
returns
.Dv HB_REGISTER_INSERTED
(1) on success,
.Dv HB_REGISTER_DUPLICATE
(0) for a duplicate name (non-fatal), and
.Dv HB_REGISTER_ERROR
(-1) on invalid input or a full table.
.Fn heartbeat_start
spawns a single background thread that fires due tasks and tracks overrun
counts per task.
.Fn heartbeat_shutdown Ar drain
stops the scheduler; when
.Ar drain
is non-zero, every active task is executed one final time before the thread
exits.
Per-task statistics (runs, overruns, last run, last error) are available via
.Fn heartbeat_get_stats .
.Pp
Both the metrics and networking modules are fully migrated onto the heartbeat
scheduler.
Each module registers a named task
.Pq Dq metrics.sample No and Dq networking.sample
and drives its 1-second sampler through it.
.Sh MODULES
All modules are registered at startup through
.Fn miniweb_module_attach_enabled
in
.Pa src/router/module_attach.c ,
called from
.Fn init_routes
in
.Pa src/router/url_registry_init.c .
Each module provides an
.Fn attach_routes
callback that registers its endpoints through the
.Vt struct router
facade, and an optional
.Fn init
callback invoked first.
.Ss Metrics
Provides
.Pa /api/metrics
and the
.Pa /
dashboard.
Collects CPU percentages
.Pq Dv KERN_CPTIME ,
memory and swap
.Pq Dv vm.uvmexp ,
load averages
.Pq Dv vm.loadavg ,
OS info, uptime, hostname, disk usage
.Pq Xr getmntinfo 3 ,
and top processes by CPU and RSS via
.Dv KERN_PROC_ALL
sysctl.
A heartbeat task
.Pq Dq metrics.sample
samples every second, pushes into a ring buffer, and updates a cached JSON
snapshot; handlers serve the snapshot rather than re-collecting on each request.
.Ss Networking
Provides
.Pa /api/networking
and the
.Pa /networking
view.
Collects routing table entries via
.Dv NET_RT_DUMP ,
DNS configuration from
.Pa /etc/resolv.conf ,
and per-interface statistics via
.Xr getifaddrs 3 /
.Vt if_data .
Active TCP/UDP connection enumeration is currently a placeholder.
A heartbeat task
.Pq Dq networking.sample
samples every second and maintains a cached JSON snapshot to keep sysctl
traversal off the HTTP request path.
.Ss Manual pages
Provides
.Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}[.fmt]
and the
.Pa /api/man/...
namespace.
Renders man pages by forking
.Xr mandoc 1
via
.Fn safe_popen_read_argv
with the configured timeout.
A semaphore limits concurrent mandoc subprocesses to prevent file descriptor
exhaustion.
Rendered output is cached in a two-level system:
.Em L1 cache
(8 shards, 64 slots, 600-second TTL) in RAM, and
.Em L2 cache
on the filesystem under
.Pa {static_dir}/man/{area}/{section}/{page}.{fmt}
with a 300-second TTL.
Supported output formats:
.Cm html , pdf , ps , md , txt .
(Note:
.Cm utf8
is not supported; use
.Cm txt
for plain text output.)
.Ss Packages
Provides
.Pa /api/packages/...
and the
.Pa /packages
view.
Wraps
.Xr pkg_info 1
to implement search, info, which-file, file-list, and installed-list queries.
Results are cached in a ring buffer with a 30-second TTL.
.Sh STORAGE LAYER
.Pa src/storage/
contains stub implementations of a planned SQLite3 service layer.
The interfaces are defined but not yet backed by SQLite3:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Fn mw_db_open , mw_db_close
\(em database lifecycle (now stores the provided path).
.It
.Fn mw_db_exec_schema
\(em schema initialisation.
.It
.Fn mw_db_migrate , mw_tx_begin , mw_tx_commit , mw_tx_rollback
\(em migration and transaction control.
.It
.Fn mw_stmt_prepare ,
.Fn mw_bind_text ,
.Fn mw_bind_int64 ,
.Fn mw_bind_null ,
.Fn mw_stmt_step ,
.Fn mw_stmt_finalize
\(em prepared statement lifecycle.
.El
.Pp
All stubs currently return
.Dv -1
except for
.Fn mw_db_open
which now properly stores the database path.
The interfaces are stable and intended to be implemented during the Phase 5
storage refactor.
.Sh OPENBSD SECURITY HARDENING
After worker threads are started,
.Fn miniweb_apply_openbsd_security
restricts the process with
.Xr unveil 2
and
.Xr pledge 2 .
.Pp
.Xr unveil 2
grants access only to:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Cm templates_dir
(read),
.Cm static_dir
(read/write/create).
.It
.Pa /usr/share/man , /usr/local/man , /usr/X11R6/man
(read).
.It
.Cm mandoc_path ,
.Pa /usr/bin/man , /usr/bin/apropos , /usr/bin/netstat , /bin/sh
(execute).
.It
.Pa /usr/sbin/pkg_info
(execute),
.Pa /var/db/pkg , /usr/local , /usr/bin , /usr/sbin , /bin , /sbin ,
.Pa /usr/local/bin
(read).
.It
.Pa /etc/passwd , /etc/group , /etc/resolv.conf
(read),
.Pa /dev/null
(read/write).
.El
.Pp
.Xr pledge 2
promises:
.Dl stdio rpath wpath cpath inet route proc exec vminfo ps getpw
.Pp
On non-OpenBSD platforms both calls are compiled out.
.Sh LOGGING
.Pa src/core/log.c
provides a thread-safe, mutex-protected logger.
Log lines are formatted as:
.Dl [YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS] [LEVEL] message
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "log_errno()"
.It Fn log_init
Opens the log file (appending) or defaults to stderr.
.It Fn log_close
Flushes and closes the log file.
.It Fn log_info , log_error
Always emitted.
.It Fn log_debug
Emitted only in verbose mode.
.It Fn log_errno
Calls
.Fn log_error
with
.Xr strerror 3
of the current
.Va errno .
.El
.Sh ENDPOINTS
.Ss Views
.Bl -tag -width "/api/packages/search"
.It Pa /
Dashboard.
.It Pa /docs
Documentation and man page browser UI.
.It Pa /networking
Networking UI.
.It Pa /packages
Package Manager UI.
.It Pa /apiroot
API Index UI.
.El
.Ss JSON APIs
The following API endpoints are available:
.Bl -tag -width "/api/packages/search"
.It Pa /api/metrics
System metrics snapshot (CPU, RAM, load, disk, processes).
.It Pa /api/networking
Networking diagnostics (routes, DNS, interfaces).
.It Pa /api/man/sections
List all available manual sections by area.
.It Pa /api/man/pages?section=X&area=Y
List pages in a specific section and area.
.It Pa /api/man/resolve?name=X&section=Y
Resolve a manual page to its filesystem path.
.It Pa /api/man/search?q=QUERY
Search manual pages.
.It Pa /api/packages/search?q=QUERY
Search installed packages.
.It Pa /api/packages/info?name=PKG
Package details.
.It Pa /api/packages/which?path=FILE
Which package owns a file.
.It Pa /api/packages/files?name=PKG
Files installed by a package.
.It Pa /api/packages/list
List all installed packages (sorted lexicographically).
.El
.Ss Manual page rendering
.Bl -tag -width "/man/{area}/{section}/{page}.txt"
.It Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}
Default HTML rendering.
.It Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}.html
HTML.
.It Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}.txt
Plain text.
.It Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}.md
Markdown.
.It Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}.pdf
PDF.
.It Pa /man/{area}/{section}/{page}.ps
PostScript.
.El
.Ss Static assets
.Bl -tag -width "/api/packages/search"
.It Pa /static/*
CSS, JavaScript, images, and other assets.
.It Pa /favicon.ico
Favicon (served from
.Pa static/assets/favicon.svg ) .
.El
.Sh SOURCE LAYOUT
.Bl -tag -width "modules/networking/"
.It Pa src/app_main.c
Server startup, signal handling, configuration loading, and module
and route registration.
The kqueue dispatcher and accept loop live in
.Pa src/net/server.c .
.It Pa src/net/server.c
kqueue loop, worker pool, accept, idle sweep, shutdown.
.It Pa src/net/connection_pool.c
Flat fd-indexed connection pool with O(1) alloc/free via LIFO free-stack
and per-slot generation counters.
.It Pa src/net/worker.c
Worker thread: request read, parse, route dispatch, keep-alive re-arm.
.It Pa src/net/work_queue.c
Thread-safe FIFO transport work queue extracted from the server entrypoint.
.It Pa src/platform/openbsd/security.c
OpenBSD sandbox boundary setup using
.Xr unveil 2
and
.Xr pledge 2 .
.It Pa src/core/conf.c
Configuration file parser:
.Fn conf_load ,
.Fn conf_parse_file ,
.Fn conf_apply_kv .
.It Pa src/core/conf_defaults.c
Compiled-in defaults, CLI override application, and config dump:
.Fn conf_defaults ,
.Fn conf_apply_cli ,
.Fn conf_dump .
.It Pa src/core/conf_validation.c
Post-parse range and consistency validation:
.Fn conf_validate .
.It Pa src/core/heartbeat.c
Public API and background thread loop for the periodic task scheduler:
.Fn heartbeat_register ,
.Fn heartbeat_unregister ,
.Fn heartbeat_update ,
.Fn heartbeat_start ,
.Fn heartbeat_stop ,
.Fn heartbeat_shutdown ,
.Fn heartbeat_get_stats .
.It Pa src/core/heartbeat_schedule.c
Due-task collection and timed-wait logic:
.Fn hb_collect_due_tasks ,
.Fn hb_collect_all_active ,
.Fn hb_wait_for_next_tick ,
.Fn hb_mark_stopped .
.It Pa src/core/heartbeat_dispatch.c
Batch execution helpers:
.Fn hb_batch_reset ,
.Fn hb_batch_push ,
.Fn hb_batch_run .
.It Pa src/core/log.c
Thread-safe logger.
.It Pa src/http/response_api.c
Response object allocation, deallocation, and field setters.
.It Pa src/http/response_helpers.c
High-level HTTP send helpers:
.Fn http_send_response ,
.Fn http_send_error ,
.Fn http_render_template ,
and client-IP extraction.
.It Pa src/http/response_file.c
Static file serving via the sharded file cache.
.It Pa src/http/response_io.c
Low-level write helpers:
.Fn write_all
and
.Fn writev_all .
.It Pa src/http/response_pool.c
Sharded response pool (16 shards, 1024 slots each) with heap fallback.
.It Pa src/http/response_file_cache.c
Sharded static file cache (16 shards, 32 slots, 256 KiB limit, 2-hit
admission, 8 inserts/shard/sec, 120 s TTL, mtime validation).
.It Pa src/http/utils.c
JSON string escaping and
.Fn safe_popen_read
(single-string shell invocation).
.It Pa src/http/utils_subprocess.c
.Fn safe_popen_read_argv
\(em execvp-based subprocess execution with poll timeout and SIGKILL.
.It Pa src/router/module_attach.c
.Fn miniweb_module_attach_enabled
module registration.
.It Pa src/router/route_table.c
Static, favicon, and hot-view-cache handlers.
.It Pa src/router/router.c
.Fn router_register
and
.Fn router_register_prefix
wrappers.
.It Pa src/router/url_registry.c
Route registration table and
.Va view_routes[]
array.
.It Pa src/router/url_registry_init.c
.Fn init_routes
\(em registers all built-in modules through the module attach API.
.It Pa src/router/url_registry_lookup.c
.Fn route_match ,
.Fn route_path_known ,
.Fn find_view_route
\(em two-pass exact/prefix resolver.
.It Pa src/router/url_registry_reverse.c
.Fn route_reverse
\(em reverse URL lookup.
.It Pa src/modules/man/
Man page rendering, two-level render cache (L1: RAM, L2: filesystem), JSON API.
.Pa man_module.c
handles route wiring, cleanup delegation, and the render/API entry points.
.Pa man_query.c
performs query validation and parameter parsing.
.Pa man_index.c
builds and manages the man page index.
.Pa man_render.c
invokes mandoc and manages the filesystem render cache.
.Pa man_service.c
and
.Pa man_json.c
are Phase 3 decomposition scaffolds pending full migration.
Semaphore limits concurrent mandoc subprocesses.
.It Pa src/modules/metrics/
System metrics collection, heartbeat task, ring buffer, and JSON API.
.Pa metrics_module.c
handles route wiring and orchestration.
.Pa metrics_collectors.c
performs sysctl data collection (CPU, memory, load, disk, OS info).
.Pa metrics_process.c
extracts per-process statistics via
.Dv KERN_PROC_ALL .
.Pa metrics_snapshot.c
maintains the ring buffer, cached JSON snapshot, and
.Fn metrics_heartbeat_cb .
.Pa metrics_service.c
and
.Pa metrics_json.c
are Phase 3 decomposition scaffolds pending full migration.
.It Pa src/modules/networking/
Networking diagnostics, heartbeat task, ring buffer, and JSON API.
.It Pa src/modules/packages/
.Xr pkg_info 1
wrapper and JSON API with ring buffer caching.
.It Pa src/render/template_render.c
Template file cache (preloaded at startup, refreshed every 60 s) and
placeholder substitution.
.It Pa src/storage/sqlite_db.c
SQLite3 database lifecycle stubs (now stores the provided path).
.It Pa src/storage/sqlite_schema.c
Schema migration and transaction stubs.
.It Pa src/storage/sqlite_stmt.c
Prepared statement stubs.
.El
.Sh SIGNAL HANDLER SAFETY
The server's
.Va running
flag is declared as
.Vt volatile sig_atomic_t
to ensure safe access from signal handler context.
This prevents undefined behaviour when
.Fn handle_signal
writes to the flag during asynchronous signal delivery.
.Sh ENTERPRISE REFACTOR ROADMAP
.Bl -tag -width "Phase 6"
.It Phase 1
Module attach API and router separation.
Complete: all modules register through
.Fn miniweb_module_attach_enabled .
.It Phase 2
Single global heartbeat scheduler.
Complete: metrics and networking both run as named heartbeat tasks.
.It Phase 3
Domain decomposition of metrics, networking, man, packages.
Scaffolded:
.Pa *_service.c
and
.Pa *_json.c
stubs are present; function bodies still to be migrated.
.It Phase 4
Documentation and architecture transition.
Complete: README, man page, and all Doxygen blocks updated.
Majority Italian-language source comments have been translated to English.
.It Phase 5
SQLite3 storage integration.
Stub interfaces are defined; only basic path storage implemented.
.It Phase 6
Performance and observability hardening.
Planned.
.El
.Sh NEXT STEPS FOR MODULARITY
The following items are the immediate backlog for reaching low
LOC-per-file and low LOC-per-function targets across the codebase.
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Migrate function bodies from
.Pa *_module.c
into the corresponding
.Pa *_service.c
(data collection) and
.Pa *_json.c
(JSON serialisation) units for all four feature modules.
After migration,
.Pa *_module.c
should contain only route handler entry points and
.Fn attach_routes .
.It
Extract platform-specific collectors into dedicated translation units under
.Pa src/platform/openbsd/
for CPU, memory, disk, process, network interfaces, and routing table.
Modules must consume only collector APIs; no direct sysctl or kvm calls
should remain inside module files.
.It
Apply function-size limits (soft 40 LOC, review trigger 80 LOC) to
.Fn miniweb_server_run ,
.Fn man_render_handler ,
and
.Fn build_system_metrics_json .
.It
Upgrade
.Pa tests/integration_endpoints.sh
from reachability smoke tests to contract-level assertions: explicit
status checks for 200/404/405 and JSON key-presence checks for core
endpoints.
.It
Implement the SQLite3 backend (Phase 5): connect
.Pa src/storage/
stubs to real
.Fn sqlite3_open_v2 ,
prepared statements, and transactions; persist module flags and bounded
metric snapshots.
.El
.Sh DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
C99-only codebase.
.It
OpenBSD KNF style.
.It
Small, reusable functions with strict module ownership.
.It
File-size guideline: soft limit 350 LOC, review trigger 500 LOC.
.It
Function-size guideline: soft limit 40 LOC, review trigger 80 LOC.
.It
Doxygen documentation for all exported symbols.
.It
All source comments in English.
.It
Compatibility-first refactor: feature parity required at every phase.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kqueue 2 ,
.Xr pledge 2 ,
.Xr unveil 2 ,
.Xr sysctl 3 ,
.Xr getifaddrs 3 ,
.Xr getmntinfo 3 ,
.Xr mandoc 1 ,
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr pkg_info 1 ,
.Xr relayd 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.An Flavio Ferretti Aq Mt flavio@flvbox.org
.It
.%U https://github.com/flavioferretti/miniweb
.Sh REFACTOR STATUS
As of 2026-03-02, server runtime decomposition is complete for the
networking layer, HTTP response layer, and routing layer; documentation
is up to date:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Pa src/net/server.c
\(em kqueue dispatcher and accept loop.
.It
.Pa src/net/connection_pool.c
\(em fd-indexed connection pool with O(1) alloc/free and generation guards.
.It
.Pa src/net/worker.c
\(em worker request read, parse, and route dispatch.
.It
.Pa src/http/response_api.c ,
.Pa src/http/response_helpers.c ,
.Pa src/http/response_file.c ,
.Pa src/http/response_io.c ,
.Pa src/http/response_pool.c ,
.Pa src/http/response_file_cache.c
\(em HTTP response layer fully decomposed from the former monolithic
.Pa response.c .
.It
.Pa src/http/utils_subprocess.c
\(em subprocess execution split from
.Pa utils.c .
.It
.Pa src/router/url_registry_init.c ,
.Pa src/router/url_registry_lookup.c ,
.Pa src/router/url_registry_reverse.c
\(em URL registry split into init, lookup, and reverse units.
.El
Module decomposition has started for metrics and scaffolded all feature modules:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Pa src/modules/metrics/metrics_collectors.c ,
.Pa src/modules/metrics/metrics_process.c ,
.Pa src/modules/metrics/metrics_snapshot.c ,
and
.Pa src/modules/metrics/metrics_json.c
now own data collection, process extraction, ring-buffer/snapshot, and
serialisation logic respectively, while
.Pa src/modules/metrics/metrics_module.c
keeps orchestration and endpoint wiring.
.It
.Pa src/modules/networking/networking_service.c
and
.Pa src/modules/networking/networking_json.c
remain scaffold units pending full extraction.
.It
.Pa src/modules/man/man_service.c
and
.Pa src/modules/man/man_json.c
remain scaffold units pending full extraction.
.It
.Pa src/modules/packages/packages_service.c
and
.Pa src/modules/packages/packages_json.c
remain scaffold units pending full extraction.
.El
All Doxygen
.Sq TODO
placeholder blocks have been replaced with accurate descriptions.
Majority Italian-language source comments have been translated to English.
Recent bug fixes include:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
JSON string escaping buffer overrun corrected.
.It
HTTP 405 status text now returns "Method Not Allowed".
.It
Signal handler safety improved with volatile sig_atomic_t.
.It
Mandoc subprocess concurrency limited via semaphore.
.It
SQLite database path now properly stored.
.It
Heartbeat scheduler uses CLOCK_MONOTONIC to avoid NTP skew.
.El
